[Android Wiki] Fix Part of #2746 : Added Bazel Installations instructions for different Operating System (#4926)
oppia/oppia-android: wiki/Bazel-Setup-Instructions-for-Mac.md

## Instructions

**The steps to install Bazel on Mac are:**
1. Set up Rosetta Terminal
2. Install Bazel 
3. Install OpenJDK 8
4. Install Python 2 and make sure it is active in your environment
5. Set Bazel, Python 2, ANDROID_HOME paths permanently in your terminal
6. Prepare the build environment
7. Verify that the build is working

### 1. Set up Rosetta Terminal

- In the Finder app on your Mac, locate the Applications folder from the favorites sidebar.
- Right-click on your Terminal app and create a duplicate Terminal (and rename it accordingly, say **Terminal Rosetta**, to avoid confusion).
- On the newly created Terminal Rosetta icon, right-click and select "Get info", and under “General”, check the option "Open using Rosetta".

**Note: Always use the Rosetta terminal for Bazel setup and running `bash setup.sh` or any Bazel build-related commands.**

### 2. Install Bazel

1. Install Bazel following the instructions [here](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/4.0.0/install-os-x.html#install-with-installer-mac-os-x). Make sure that you follow the instructions for installing a specific version (Oppia Android requires 4.0.0 and won't build on other versions). 

> 2. That’s it, now Bazel is install, you can check it by running the command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. That’s it, now Bazel is installed, and you can verify it by running the command:
```

Author: Done.

   ```
   bazel --version
   ```
   - **Expected Output**
   ```
   bazel 4.0.0
   ```

### 3. Install OpenJDK 8

Oppia Android also requires OpenJDK 8.
Follow the instructions [here](https://installvirtual.com/install-openjdk-8-on-mac-using-brew-adoptopenjdk/) to install OpenJDK 8. 
Note that this requires the installation of brew as a pre-requisite, which can be done by following the instructions [here](https://mac.install.guide/homebrew/index.html). You can then set up your `$JAVA_HOME` environment variable using these [instructions](https://stackoverflow.com/a/75167958/11396524).

### 4. Install Python 2 and make sure it is active in your environment

> To install Python 2 in MacOS follow the follows the commands given below. Note that, this requires installation of brew as a pre-requisite, which can be done by following the instructions [here](https://mac.install.guide/homebrew/index.html). 

Reviewer 2: Nit: drop comma after "that".

```
brew install pyenv
pyenv install 2.7.18
pyenv global 2.7.18
```

> - To make sure Python 2 is active in your environment, navigate to the **oppia-android** directory and run the following commands before running the Bazel build.

Reviewer 2: Isn't this an environment thing that should be done only in step 5?

Author: Yes I also think that. Thanks, updating.
But I also think we keep it as verifing command that Python is install or not.

```
export PATH="$(pyenv root)/shims:${PATH}"
python --version
```

### 5. Set Bazel, Python 2, ANDROID_HOME paths permanently in your terminal

- To set the `Bazel`, `Python 2`, `ANDROID_HOME` path permanently in your terminal run these commands:
    ```
    sudo nano /etc/paths
    ```
   - Enter your password, when prompted.
   - Go to the bottom of the file, and enter these paths 
     ```
     /Users/{YourMacUserName}/bin
     $(pyenv root)/shims:${PATH}
     $HOME/Library/Android/sdk
     ```
   - Hit control-x to quit.
   - Enter “Y” to save the modified buffer.
   - That’s it!  To test it, in a new terminal window, type: `echo $PATH`

> **Note: You must set the path for `Bazel`, `Python 2`, `ANDROID_HOME` before running bazel build for oppia-android, otherwise you will get an error.**

Reviewer: It says here that we must set the path for bazel and the others, but I don't see where we give instructions for setting the bazel path. Please review.

Author: @adhiamboperes The whole step 5: "Set Bazel, Python 2, ANDROID_HOME paths permanently in your terminal" is instruction for this path. For bazel we have this path with this [line](https://github.com/MohitGupta121/oppia-android/blob/8722dfde272538853d48cb22b60872230b0bfc95/wiki/Bazel-Setup-Instructions-for-Mac.md?plain=1#L67). Thanks!

Author: Done.

### 6. Prepare the build environment

Follow the instructions in [oppia-bazel-tools](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-bazel-tools#readme), in order to prepare your environment to support Oppia Android builds.

### 7. Verify that the build is working

At this point, your system should be able to build Oppia Android. To verify, try building the APK (from your subsystem terminal -- note that this and all other Bazel commands must be run from the root of the ‘oppia-android’ directory otherwise they will fail):

> ```sh

Reviewer: I think the sh part needs to be removed

Author: Done.

bazel build //:oppia
```

(Note that this command may take 10-20 minutes to complete depending on the performance of your machine).

If everything is working, you should see output like the following:

```
Target //:oppia up-to-date:
  bazel-bin/oppia_deploy.jar
  bazel-bin/oppia_unsigned/apk
  bazel-bin/oppia/apk
INFO: Elapsed time: ...
INFO: 1 process...
INFO: Build completed successfully, ...
```

> If you see the above, you can proceed to use your subsystem for Bazel commands while developing Oppia. If you instead see an error, please [file an issue](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/issues/new/choose).

Reviewer: This bit about the subsystem, isn't that windows specific? I noticed it is also mentioned in the Linux instructions.

Author: Done.

## Bazel Setup for Mac including Apple silicon (M1/M2) chips

## Instructions

**The steps to install Bazel on Mac are:**
1. Setup Rosetta Terminal
2. Install Bazel 

> 3. Install the OpenJDK 8

Reviewer 2: Drop "the"

Author: Done.

4. Install Python 2 and make sure it is active in your environment
5. Set the Android SDK
6. Set up the environment to be able to build Oppia Android
7. Verify that the build is working
8. Run Bazel commands as needed during development

### 1. Setup Rosetta Terminal

- In the Finder app on your Mac, locate the Applications folder from the favorites sidebar.
- Right-click on your Terminal app and create a duplicate Terminal (and rename it accordingly, say **Terminal Rosetta**, to avoid confusion).
- On the newly created Terminal Rosetta icon, right-click and select "Get info", and under “General”, check the option "Open using Rosetta".

> **Note: Always use the Rosetta terminal for Bazel setup and running the `bash setup.sh` or any Bazel build-related commands.**

Reviewer 2: running the --> running

Author: Done.

> ### 2. Installing Bazel

Reviewer 2: Here and below, make sure the headings match with the steps in the "table of contents" above.

Author: Done.

> 1. Install Bazel from [here](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/4.0.0/install-os-x.html#install-with-installer-mac-os-x). Make sure that you follow the instructions for installing a specific version (Oppia Android requires 4.0.0 and won't build on other versions).

Reviewer 2: from --> following the instructions

Author: Done.

> 2. After Install Bazel from the above instructions, set the Bazel path permanently in your terminal using these commands:

Reviewer 2: After installing Bazel using the ...

Author: Done.

    ```
    sudo nano /etc/paths
    ```
   - Enter your password, when prompted.
   - Go to the bottom of the file, and enter this path (`/Users/{YourMacUserName}/bin`)
   - Hit control-x to quit.
   - Enter “Y” to save the modified buffer.
   - That’s it!  To test it, in a new terminal window, type: `echo $PATH`
    

> 3. That’s it, now Bazel is setup permanently in your terminal, you can again check it by using command:

Reviewer 2: by using command --> by running the command

Also, explain what output they're supposed to see.

Author: Done

   ```
   bazel –version
   ```

> **Note: The path for Bazel 4.0.0 is set before running Bazel build otherwise you get an error.**

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this sentence. Is it a warning or a statement? Please make it clearer, especially if this is an action that the developer is supposed to take. Do you mean something like "You must set the path for Bazel 4.0.0 before running `bazel build`, otherwise you will get an error"?

Author: Yes that's I mean "You must set the path for Bazel 4.0.0 before running bazel build, otherwise you will get an error"

Author: Done

### 3. Installing the OpenJDK 8

Oppia Android also requires OpenJDK 8.
Follow the instructions [here](https://installvirtual.com/install-openjdk-8-on-mac-using-brew-adoptopenjdk/) to install OpenJDK 8. 
Note that this requires the installation of brew as a pre-requisite, which can be done by following the instructions [here](https://mac.install.guide/homebrew/index.html). You can then set up your `$JAVA_HOME` environment variable using these [instructions](https://stackoverflow.com/a/75167958/11396524).

### 4. Installing Python 2

```
brew install pyenv
pyenv install 2.7.18
pyenv global 2.7.18
```

> - To make sure Python 2 is active in your environment, follow these commands in **oppia-android** directory before running the Bazel build.

Reviewer 2: ...your environment, navigate to the **oppia-android** directory and run the following commands before running the Bazel build.

Author: Done

```
export PATH="$(pyenv root)/shims:${PATH}"
python --version
```

> - To set the python path (`$(pyenv root)/shims:${PATH}`) permanently use the same commands as mentioned in **Step 2 Installing Bazel**.

Reviewer 2: This is not entirely clear. I would suggest repeating the commands so that it's clear which part of step 2 needs to be modified.

Author: Done

> **Note: The path for Python 2  is set before running Bazel build otherwise you get an error.**

Reviewer 2: Ditto, same concerns as above.

Author: Done

### 5. Set the Android SDK

- Ensure that your `ANDROID_HOME` environment variable is set to the location of your Android SDK before running Bazel build.

- To do this, find the path to the installed SDK using Android Studio’s SDK Manager (install SDK 28). Assuming the SDK is installed to default locations, you can use the following command to set the `ANDROID_HOME` variable:
```
export ANDROID_HOME=$HOME/Library/Android/sdk
```
- To confirm that it is set, run the following command:
```
echo $ANDROID_HOME
```

> To set the Android SDK path (`$HOME/Library/Android/sdk`) permanently use the same commands as mentioned in **Step 2 Installing Bazel**.

Reviewer 2: I'm starting to wonder whether you should just have separate installation steps for each thing, and then have a single step that is "set the paths/variables permanently" and give a clear command that lets them do it all at once for all the dependencies above. Ideally all your steps are self-contained and don't involve referencing other steps.

Author: Thanks Sean for this suggestions, I added one separate and common step for all of these.

Author: Done

Note: The path for Android SDK is set before running Bazel build otherwise you get an error.

### 6. Preparing the build environment for Oppia-Android

Follow the instructions in [oppia-bazel-tools](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-bazel-tools#readme), in order to prepare your environment to support Oppia Android builds.

### 7. Verifying the build

> At this point, your system should be able to build Oppia Android. To verify, try building the APK (from your subsystem terminal -- note that this & all other Bazel commands must be run from the root of the ‘oppia-android’ directory otherwise they will fail):

Reviewer 2: & --> and

Author: Done

## Bazel Setup for Mac including Apple silicon (M1/M2) chips

## Instructions

**The steps to install Bazel on Mac are:**

> 1. Setup Rosetta Terminal

Reviewer 2: "Set up", here and below

Author: Done.

2. Install Bazel 
3. Install OpenJDK 8
4. Install Python 2 and make sure it is active in your environment
5. Set up the ANDROID_HOME environment variable
6. Set Bazel, Python 2, ANDROID_HOME paths permanently in your terminal
7. Prepare the build environment
8. Verify that the build is working

### 1. Setup Rosetta Terminal

- In the Finder app on your Mac, locate the Applications folder from the favorites sidebar.
- Right-click on your Terminal app and create a duplicate Terminal (and rename it accordingly, say **Terminal Rosetta**, to avoid confusion).
- On the newly created Terminal Rosetta icon, right-click and select "Get info", and under “General”, check the option "Open using Rosetta".

**Note: Always use the Rosetta terminal for Bazel setup and running `bash setup.sh` or any Bazel build-related commands.**

### 2. Install Bazel

1. Install Bazel following the instructions [here](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/4.0.0/install-os-x.html#install-with-installer-mac-os-x). Make sure that you follow the instructions for installing a specific version (Oppia Android requires 4.0.0 and won't build on other versions). 

> 2. That’s it, now Bazel is setup permanently in your terminal, you can again check it by running the command:

Reviewer 2: This seems off -- isn't this what's supposed to be done in step 6?

Author: Done.

   ```
   bazel --version
   ```
   - **Expected Output**
   ```
   bazel 4.0.0
   ```

> **Note: You must set the path for `bazel 4.0.0` before running bazel build for oppia-android, otherwise you will get an error.**

Reviewer 2: This also relates to step 6?

Author: Done.

### 3. Install OpenJDK 8

Oppia Android also requires OpenJDK 8.
Follow the instructions [here](https://installvirtual.com/install-openjdk-8-on-mac-using-brew-adoptopenjdk/) to install OpenJDK 8. 
Note that this requires the installation of brew as a pre-requisite, which can be done by following the instructions [here](https://mac.install.guide/homebrew/index.html). You can then set up your `$JAVA_HOME` environment variable using these [instructions](https://stackoverflow.com/a/75167958/11396524).

### 4. Installing Python 2

> ```

Reviewer 2: Write something before this, e.g. "To do XYZ, run the following commands:"

Author: Done.

brew install pyenv
pyenv install 2.7.18
pyenv global 2.7.18
```

- To make sure Python 2 is active in your environment, navigate to the **oppia-android** directory and run the following commands before running the Bazel build.

```
export PATH="$(pyenv root)/shims:${PATH}"
python --version
```

> **Note: You must set the path for `Python 2` before running bazel build for oppia-android, otherwise you will get an error.**

Reviewer 2: This one too. All this path stuff should be step 6? Also the bit above presumably since it's about the env.

Author: Done.

> ### 5. Set up the ANDROID_HOME environment variable

Reviewer 2: This should be merged with step 6 right?

Author: Done.

- To do this, find the path to the installed SDK using Android Studio’s SDK Manager (install SDK 28). Assuming the SDK is installed to default locations, you can use the following command to set the `ANDROID_HOME` variable:
```
export ANDROID_HOME=$HOME/Library/Android/sdk
```
- To confirm that it is set, run the following command:
```
echo $ANDROID_HOME
```

**Note: You must set the path for `ANDROID_HOME` before running bazel build for oppia-android, otherwise you will get an error.**

### 6. Set Bazel, Python 2, ANDROID_HOME paths permanently in your terminal

- To set the `Bazel`, `Python 2`, `ANDROID_HOME` path permanently in your terminal run these commands:
    ```
    sudo nano /etc/paths
    ```
   - Enter your password, when prompted.
   - Go to the bottom of the file, and enter these paths 
     ```
     /Users/{YourMacUserName}/bin
     $(pyenv root)/shims:${PATH}
     $HOME/Library/Android/sdk
     ```
   - Hit control-x to quit.
   - Enter “Y” to save the modified buffer.
   - That’s it!  To test it, in a new terminal window, type: `echo $PATH`

> ### 7. Preparing the build environment for Oppia-Android

Reviewer 2: See earlier comment. Please make sure these titles exactly match the table of contents.

Author: Done.

Follow the instructions in [oppia-bazel-tools](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-bazel-tools#readme), in order to prepare your environment to support Oppia Android builds.

### 8. Verifying the build

At this point, your system should be able to build Oppia Android. To verify, try building the APK (from your subsystem terminal -- note that this and all other Bazel commands must be run from the root of the ‘oppia-android’ directory otherwise they will fail):

```sh
bazel build //:oppia
```

(Note that this command may take 10-20 minutes to complete depending on the performance of your machine).

If everything is working, you should see output like the following:

```
Target //:oppia up-to-date:
  bazel-bin/oppia_deploy.jar
  bazel-bin/oppia_unsigned/apk
  bazel-bin/oppia/apk
INFO: Elapsed time: ...
INFO: 1 process...
INFO: Build completed successfully, ...
```

If you see the above, you can proceed to use your subsystem for Bazel commands while developing Oppia. If you instead see an error, please [file an issue](https://github.com/oppia/oppia-android/issues/new/choose).

> Note also that the ``oppia.apk`` under the ``bazel-bin`` directory of your local copy of Oppia Android should be a fully functioning development version of the app that can be installed using ``adb`` (though we recommend using ADB from within a Windows command prompt or shell since the Ubuntu subsystem may not have correct support to access devices or emulators connected to the native Windows machine).

Reviewer: @MohitGupta121 PTAL at the subsection, it contains Windows-specific instructions which we should edit out.

Author: Okay thanks, @adhiamboperes I will make changes.

Author: Done @adhiamboperes PTAL, Thanks.

### 4. Install Python 2 and make sure it is active in your environment

To install Python 2 in MacOS follow the follows the commands given below. Note that this requires installation of brew as a pre-requisite, which can be done by following the instructions [here](https://mac.install.guide/homebrew/index.html). 
```
brew install pyenv
pyenv install 2.7.18
pyenv global 2.7.18
```

> - To make sure Python 2 is install successfully and active in your environment, navigate to the **oppia-android** directory and run following commands:

Reviewer 2: install successfully --> successfully installed

following --> the following

Author: Done @seanlip Thanks, PTAL.
